[docs/data] Add user guide on building custom datasource for Ray Data (#28717)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/data/custom-datasource.rst

.. _supporting_custom_datasource:

============================
Supporting Custom Datasource
============================

> Ray Datasets supports a wide range of `input formats <https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/data/dataset.html#supported-input-formats>`__ 

Reviewer: We shouldn't hardcode the link here but use rst reference instead.

> Ray Datasets supports a wide range of `input formats <https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/data/dataset.html#supported-input-formats>`__ 

Reviewer: I feel input formats and data sources are different concepts

example here, let's call it ``MongoDatasource``. At high level, it will have two 
core parts to build out: read support with :meth:`create_reader() <ray.data.Datasource.create_reader>` 
and write support with :meth:`do_write() <ray.data.Datasource.do_write>`.

Here are the key design choices we will make this in guide:

-  MongoDB connector: We will use `PyMongo <https://pymongo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`__ to connect MongDB.
-  MongoDB to Arrow conversion: We will use `PyMongoArrow <https://mongo-arrow.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ to convert query results into Arrow format for Dataset.
-  Parallel execution: We will assume the user to provide a list of MongoDB queries, with each corresponding to a shard (i.e. a :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask`) that can be executed in parallel.

------------
Read support
------------

To implement :meth:`create_reader() <ray.data.Datasource.create_reader>` and support 
read, the major work will be subclassing :class:`~ray.data.Datasource.Reader` for 
MongoDB. What it does is creating a list of :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask` for the given 
list of MongDB queries. Each ``ReadTask`` will return a list of blocks when called, and 

> the ``ReadTask`` are executed in remote functions to parallelize the execution.

Reviewer: remote functions -> remote workers

.. _custom_datasources:

==================
Custom Datasources
==================

Ray Datasets supports multiple ways to :ref:`create a dataset <creating_datasets>`, 
allowing you to easily ingest data of common formats from popular sources. However, if the 
datasource you want to read from is not in the built-in list, don't worry, you can implement 
a custom one for your use case. In this guide, we will walk you through how to build 
your own custom datasource, using MongoDB as an example.

A custom datasource is an implementation of :class:`~ray.data.Datasource`. In the 
example here, let's call it ``MongoDatasource``. At a high level, it will have two 
core parts to build out: read support with :meth:`create_reader() <ray.data.Datasource.create_reader>` 
and write support with :meth:`do_write() <ray.data.Datasource.do_write>`.

Here are the key design choices we will make in this guide:

> -  **MongoDB connector**: We will use `PyMongo <https://pymongo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`__ to connect to MongDB.

Reviewer 2: Use the present tense.
Use `PyMongo <https://pymongo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`__ to connect to MongDB.

Author: Done here and other comments.

-  **MongoDB to Arrow conversion**: We will use `PyMongoArrow <https://mongo-arrow.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ to convert query results into Arrow tables, which Datasets supports as a block format.

> -  **Parallel execution**: We will ask the user to provide a list of MongoDB queries, with each corresponding to a shard (i.e. a :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask`) that can be executed in parallel.

Reviewer 2: Ask the user to provide a list of ....

------------
Read support
------------

To support reading, we implement :meth:`create_reader() <ray.data.Datasource.create_reader>`, returning a :class:`~ray.data.Datasource.Reader` implementation for 
MongoDB. This ``Reader`` creates a list of :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask` for the given 

> list of MongDB queries. Each :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask` will return a list of blocks when called, and 

Reviewer 2: Present tense:
Each :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask` returns

> .. _supporting_custom_datasource:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. _custom_datasources:
```

> ============================
> Supporting Custom Datasource
> ============================

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
==================
Custom Datasources
==================
```

> Ray Datasets supports multiple ways to :ref:`create Datasets <creating_datasets>`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Ray Datasets supports multiple ways to :ref:`create a dataset <creating_datasets>`
```

> so you can easily read from those data sources and create Dataset. However, if the 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
allowing you to easily ingest data of common formats from popular sources. However, if the 
```

> datasource you want to read from is not in the list, don't worry, you can implement 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
datasource you want to read from is not in the built-in list, don't worry, you can implement 
```

a custom one for your use case. In this guide, we will walk you through how to build 

> your own custom datasource with MongoDB as an example.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
your own custom datasource, using MongoDB as an example.
```

A custom datasource is an implementation of :class:`~ray.data.Datasource`. In the 

> example here, let's call it ``MongoDatasource``. At high level, it will have two 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
example here, let's call it ``MongoDatasource``. At a high level, it will have two 
```

core parts to build out: read support with :meth:`create_reader() <ray.data.Datasource.create_reader>` 
and write support with :meth:`do_write() <ray.data.Datasource.do_write>`.

> Here are the key design choices we will make this in guide:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here are the key design choices we will make in this guide:
```

Author: Ha, I'm not sure how did I write them in reverse order:)

> -  MongoDB connector: We will use `PyMongo <https://pymongo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`__ to connect MongDB.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  **MongoDB connector:** We will use `PyMongo <https://pymongo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`__ to connect to MongDB.
```

> -  MongoDB to Arrow conversion: We will use `PyMongoArrow <https://mongo-arrow.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ to convert query results into Arrow format for Dataset.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  **MongoDB to Arrow conversion:** We will use `PyMongoArrow <https://mongo-arrow.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ to convert query results into Arrow tables, which Datasets supports as a block format.
```

> -  Parallel execution: We will assume the user to provide a list of MongoDB queries, with each corresponding to a shard (i.e. a :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask`) that can be executed in parallel.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-  **Parallel execution:** We will ask the user to provide a list of MongoDB queries, with each corresponding to a shard (i.e. a :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask`) that can be executed in parallel.
```

------------
Read support
------------

> To implement :meth:`create_reader() <ray.data.Datasource.create_reader>` and support 
> read, the major work will be subclassing :class:`~ray.data.Datasource.Reader` for 
> MongoDB. What it does is creating a list of :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask` for the given 
> list of MongDB queries. Each :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask` will return a list of blocks when called, and 
> the :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask` are executed in remote workers to parallelize the execution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To support reading, we implement :meth:`create_reader() <ray.data.Datasource.create_reader>`, returning a :class:`~ray.data.Datasource.Reader` implementation for 
MongoDB. This ``Reader`` creates a list of :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask` for the given 
list of MongDB queries. Each :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask` will return a list of blocks when called, and 
the :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask` are executed in remote workers to parallelize the execution.
```

> First of all, let's handle a single MongDB query, as this is the execution unit in 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, let's handle a single MongDB query, as this is the execution unit in 
```

:class:`~ray.data.ReadTask`. We need to connect to MongDB, execute the query against it, 

> and then convert results into Arrow format. The ``PyMongo`` and  ``PyMongoArrow`` are 
> used to achieve these.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and then convert results into Arrow format. We use ``PyMongo`` and  ``PyMongoArrow`` to achieve this.
```

.. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/custom_datasource.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __read_single_query_start__
    :end-before: __read_single_query_end__

> Once we have this building block, we can just apply it for each provided MongoDB 
> queries and get the implementation of :class:`~ray.data.Datasource.Reader`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once we have this building block, we can just apply it for each of the provided MongoDB 
queries and get the implementation of :class:`~ray.data.Datasource.Reader`.
```

-------------
Write support
-------------

Similar to read support, we start with handling a single block. Again 
the ``PyMongo`` and  ``PyMongoArrow`` are used for MongoDB interactions.

.. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/custom_datasource.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __write_single_block_start__
    :end-before: __write_single_block_end__

To write multiple blocks in parallel, we again use Ray remote workers
to launch them in parallel.

.. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/custom_datasource.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __write_multiple_blocks_start__
    :end-before: __write_multiple_blocks_end__

------------
Put together
------------

With ``_MongoDatasourceReader`` and ``_write_multiple_blocks`` above, we are 
ready to implement :meth:`create_reader() <ray.data.Datasource.create_reader>` 
and :meth:`do_write() <ray.data.Datasource.do_write>`, and put together 
into a ``MongoDatasource``.

.. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/custom_datasource.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __mongo_datasource_start__
    :end-before: __mongo_datasource_end__

Now you can create a Ray Dataset from and write back to MongoDB, just like 

> any other data sources!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
any other datasource!
```

.. code-block:: python

    # Read from MongoDB datasource.
    # The args are passed to MongoDatasource.create_reader().
    ds = ray.data.read_datasource(
        MongoDatasource(),
        uri=MY_URI, database=MY_DATABASE,
        collection=MY_COLLECTION, pipelines=MY_QUERIES
    )

    # Data processing with Dataset APIs
    # ....

    # Write to MongoDB datasource.
    # The args are passed to MongoDatasource.do_write().
    ds.write_datasource(
        MongoDatasource(), uri=MY_URI, database=MY_DATABASE, collection=MY_COLLECTION

>     )

Reviewer 3: Could we move this to the `doc_code/custom_datasources.py` as well?

Author: This part is not runnable, as it's lacking a hosted public MongoDB (like S3).

    )

    # Write to custom MongoDB datasource.
    # The args are passed to MongoDatasource.do_write().
    ds.write_datasource(
        MongoDatasource(), uri=MY_URI, database=MY_DATABASE, collection=MY_COLLECTION
    )

A custom datasource is an implementation of :class:`~ray.data.Datasource`. In the 
example here, let's call it ``MongoDatasource``. At a high level, it will have two 
core parts to build out:

* read support with :meth:`create_reader() <ray.data.Datasource.create_reader>`
* write support with :meth:`do_write() <ray.data.Datasource.do_write>`.

Here are the key design choices we will make in this guide:

-  **MongoDB connector**: We use `PyMongo <https://pymongo.readthedocs.io/en/stable/>`__ to connect to MongoDB.
-  **MongoDB to Arrow conversion**: We use `PyMongoArrow <https://mongo-arrow.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`__ to convert query results into Arrow tables, which Datasets supports as a block format.
-  **Parallel execution**: We ask the user to provide a list of MongoDB queries, with each corresponding to a read task (i.e. a :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask`) that Datasets will execute in parallel.

------------
Read support
------------

> To support reading, we implement :meth:`create_reader() <ray.data.Datasource.create_reader>`, returning a :class:`~ray.data.Datasource.Reader` implementation for 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To support reading, we implement :meth:`create_reader() <ray.data.Datasource.create_reader>`, returning a :class:`~ray.data.datasource.Reader` implementation for 
```

Reviewer 3: I think that we need to add [`ray.data.datasource.Reader`](https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/db2f84bdfa49d218f97bf7f10678232bff8c48d5/python/ray/data/datasource/datasource.py#L105-L133) to the API reference docs: https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/master/doc/source/data/api/input_output.rst#datasource-api

MongoDB. This ``Reader`` creates a list of :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask` for the given 

> list of MongoDB queries. Each :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask` returns a list of blocks when called, and

Reviewer 3: We may want to give more details here about `ReadTask`, e.g. how it takes a no-arg read function that returns a list of data blocks, and a pre-read specification of the block metadata containing any metadata (number of rows, size in bytes, schema, etc.) that we know about the block before actually executing the read task. We'd also want to link to the `BlockMetadata` API docs, so the user knows how to construct it even if they're filling in most fields as null. https://docs.ray.io/en/master/data/api/data_representations.html#ray.data.block.BlockMetadata

each :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask` is executed in remote workers to parallelize the execution.

> You can find documentation about :ref:`Ray Data blocks here <block-api>`.

Reviewer 3: Branding
```suggestion
You can find documentation about :ref:`Ray Datasets blocks here <block-api>`.
```

Reviewer 3: Also, we might want to link out to the Datasets data model Key Concepts section to give a better idea of what these "blocks" are. https://docs.ray.io/en/master/data/key-concepts.html#datasets

First, let's handle a single MongoDB query, which is the unit of execution in
:class:`~ray.data.ReadTask`. We need to connect to MongoDB, execute the query against it,
and then convert results into Arrow format. We use ``PyMongo`` and  ``PyMongoArrow``
to achieve this.

> Read more about `the PyMongoArrow function here <https://mongo-arrow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/api.html#pymongoarrow.api.aggregate_arrow_all>`__.

Reviewer 3: Nit: Don't include "the" in link.
```suggestion
Read more about the `PyMongoArrow function here <https://mongo-arrow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/api.html#pymongoarrow.api.aggregate_arrow_all>`__.
```

.. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/custom_datasource.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __read_single_query_start__
    :end-before: __read_single_query_end__

Once we have this building block, we can just apply it for each of the provided MongoDB 
queries. In particular, below, we construct a `_MongoDatasourceReader` by subclassing

> a :class:`~ray.data.Datasource.Reader`, and we implement `__init__` and `get_read_tasks`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
a :class:`~ray.data.Datasource.Reader`, and we implement ``__init__`` and ``get_read_tasks``.
```

> In `__init__`, we pass in a couple arguments that will be eventually used in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In ``__init__``, we pass in a couple arguments that will be eventually used in
```

> constructing the MongoDB query in `_read_single_query`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
constructing the MongoDB query in ``_read_single_query``.
```

> In `get_read_tasks`, we construct a `ReadTask` object for each `query` ("pipeline") object.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In ``get_read_tasks``, we construct a :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask` object for each ``query`` ("pipeline") object.
```

> A list of `ReadTask` objects are returned at the end of the function call, and these

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A list of :class:`~ray.data.ReadTask` objects are returned at the end of the function call, and these
```

> tasks are executed on remote workers by the Datasets execution engine (not shown).

Reviewer 3: We should link to a relevant Key Concepts or feature guide section for this Datasets execution model call-out, e.g. this: https://docs.ray.io/en/master/data/key-concepts.html#reading-data.

.. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/custom_datasource.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __mongo_datasource_reader_start__
    :end-before: __mongo_datasource_reader_end__

Now, we have finished implementing support for reading from a custom datasource!
Let's move on to implementing support for writing back to the custom datasource.

-------------
Write support
-------------

Similar to read support, we start with handling a single block. Again 
the ``PyMongo`` and  ``PyMongoArrow`` are used for MongoDB interactions.

> Read more about the `PyMongoArrow function call <https://mongo-arrow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/api.html#pymongoarrow.api.write>`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Read more about the `PyMongoArrow function here <https://mongo-arrow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/api.html#pymongoarrow.api.write>`__.
```

==================

Ray Datasets supports multiple ways to :ref:`create a dataset <creating_datasets>`, 
allowing you to easily ingest data of common formats from popular sources. However, if the 
datasource you want to read from is not in the built-in list, don't worry, you can implement 
a custom one for your use case. In this guide, we will walk you through how to build 
your own custom datasource, using `MongoDB <https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/introduction/>`__ as an example.
By the end of the guide, you will have a ``MongoDatasource`` that you can use to create dataset as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    # Read from custom MongoDB datasource to create a dataset.
    ds = ray.data.read_datasource(
        MongoDatasource(),
        uri=MY_URI,
        database=MY_DATABASE,
        collection=MY_COLLECTION,
        pipelines=MY_PIPELINES
    )

    # Write the dataset to custom MongoDB datasource.
    ds.write_datasource(
        MongoDatasource(), uri=MY_URI, database=MY_DATABASE, collection=MY_COLLECTION
    )

.. tip::

    There are a few MongoDB concepts involved here. The `URI <https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/connection-string/>`__ points to

>     a MongoDB instance, which hosts `Databases and Collections <https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/connection-string/>`__. A collection

Reviewer 4: this link should be https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/core/databases-and-collections/ .

>     a MongoDB instance, which hosts `Databases and Collections <https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/connection-string/>`__. A collection

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    a MongoDB instance, which hosts `Databases and Collections <https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/core/databases-and-collections/>`__. A collection
```

and :meth:`do_write() <ray.data.Datasource.do_write>`, and put together 
a ``MongoDatasource``.

.. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/custom_datasource.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __mongo_datasource_start__
    :end-before: __mongo_datasource_end__

Now you can create a Ray Dataset from and write back to MongoDB, just like 
any other datasource!

.. code-block:: python

    # Read from MongoDB datasource and create a dataset.
    # The args are passed to MongoDatasource.create_reader().
    ds = ray.data.read_datasource(
        MongoDatasource(),
        uri="mongodb://username:password@mongodb0.example.com:27017/?authSource=admin",
        database="my_db",
        collection=="my_collection",
        pipelines=my_pipelines, # See the example definition of ``my_pipelines`` above
    )

    # Data preprocessing with Dataset APIs here
    # ...

    # Write the dataset back to MongoDB datasource.
    # The args are passed to MongoDatasource.do_write().
    ds.write_datasource(
        MongoDatasource(),
        uri="mongodb://username:password@mongodb0.example.com:27017/?authSource=admin",
        database="my_db",
        collection="my_collection"

>     )

Reviewer 4: It would be great to have a section at the end, to encourage users to contribute their custom data sources back to OSS. Non-blocking and we can add in a followup.
Something like:

```
Contributions of custom datasource to Ray Datasets are welcome!
If you think your custom datasource implementation can benefit other users, 
we encourage you create GitHub issue on Ray to initiate discussion.
```
